+++
title = "Cohesion"
date = 2025-04-22
draft = false
path = "2025-04/cohesion"

[taxonomies]
categories = ["dev"]
tags = ["architecture", "engineering", "design"]
+++

Many months ago, I've watched a talk by Kent Beck, where he introduced
[coupling and cohesion](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yBEcq23OgB4).

Until this video, I was focused mainly on coupling (during reviews and design),
the cohesion of my code, was mostly the result of grouping "related"-code and
my OCD, assuming low coupling involved high cohesion.

Before going one, let's define each concept:

Coupling is the degree of interdependence between software modules, it's
multidimensional.

From higher to lower coupling we have, on functions/procedures/methods:

* Content: back in the days, there were `goto`, allowing to jump anywhere in another procedure
* Common: access to the same global variables, without control
* External: sharing a protocol to an external system, without sharing the implementation
* Control: when a module drives another module flow
* Stamp/data-structured: when two modules share a different subset of a data-structure
* Data: when two modules only share the data-structure, completely

We also have other dimensions:

* Temporal: things should be run in a specific order
* Dynamic: modules are working because they are specifically running together
* Semantic: modules are semantically similar
* Logical: modules are bound conceptually

See [connascence](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Connascence) to analyze coupling.

On another hand, we have cohesion, which is the strength of the bounds between
the element of a module (to some extent, a highly cohesive module, have
components highly coupled together).

There are multiple levels:

* Coincidental: arbitrary grouping
* Logical: grouped because they belong to the same category (e.g. all queries together, all forms together, etc.)
* Procedural: things are put together because they should be called in a given order
* Communicational/informational: things are put together because they operate on the same data
* Sequential: grouped because a part produce some data consumed by the next one
* Functional: things are put together because they are contributing to achieve a well-defined process
* Perfect: grouped because they are dedicated to a well-defined process and cannot be reduced

As mentioned earlier, I had a first "ahah moment", at the time of watching it,
focusing more on cohesion, trying to balance it with coupling.

I had a clear motivation regarding coupling: reduce the pain of editing may
place for a simple change.

But I lacked one for cohesion.

That's my second "ahah moment": clarity, reducing the noise making a change.

If you have a change to make, the cognitive load and the regression risk
decrease as the targeted code is isolated and has not unrelated parts.
